<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Maternal Eloquence</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>On the Friday morning there was a solemn conference at the brewery between <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan found herself to be in some difficulty as to the line of action which she ought to take, and the alliances which she ought to form. She was passionately attached to her son, and for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt she had no strong liking. But then she was very averse to this proposed marriage with Rachel Ray, and was willing for a while to make a treaty with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt, offensive and defensive, as against her own son, if by doing so she could put a stop to so outrageous a proceeding on his part. He had seen her before he started for London, and had told her both the occurrences of the day. He had described to her how Tappitt had turned him out of the brewery, poker in hand, and how, in consequence of Tappitt’s “pigheaded obstinacy,” it was now necessary that their joint affairs should be set right by the hand of the law. He had then told her also that there was no longer any room for doubt or argument between them as regarding Rachel. He had gone out to Bragg’s End that morning, had made his offer, and had been accepted. His mother therefore would see⁠—so he surmised⁠—that, as any opposition on her part must now be futile, she might as well take Rachel to her heart at once. He went so far as to propose to her that she should go over to Rachel in his absence⁠—“it would be very gracious if you could do it tomorrow, mother,” he said⁠—and go through that little process of taking her future daughter-in-law to her heart. But in answer to this <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan said very little. She said very little, but she looked much. “My dear, I cannot move so quick as you do; I am older. I am afraid, however, that you have been rash.” He said something, as on such occasions young men do, as to his privilege of choosing for himself, as to his knowing what wife would suit him, as to his contempt for money, and as to the fact⁠—“the undoubted fact,” as he declared it⁠—and in that declaration I am prepared to go hand-in-hand with him⁠—that Rachel Ray was a lady. But he was clearheaded enough to perceive that his mother did not intend to agree with him. “When we are married she will come round,” he said to himself, and then he took himself off by the night mail train to London.</p>
			<p>Under these circumstances <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan felt that her only chance of carrying on the battle would be by means of a treaty with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt. Had the affair of the brewery stood alone, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan would have ranged herself loyally on the side of her son. She would have resented the uplifting of that poker, and shown her resentment by an immediate withdrawal from the brewery. She would have said a word or two⁠—a stately word or two⁠—as to the justice of her son’s cause, and have carried herself and her daughter off to the inn. As things were now, her visit to the brewery must no doubt be curtailed in its duration; but in the meantime might not a blow be struck against that foolish matrimonial project⁠—an opportune blow, and by the aid of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt? Therefore on that Friday morning, when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Prong was listening with enraptured ears to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Prime’s acceptance of his suit⁠—under certain pecuniary conditions⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt were sitting in conference at the brewery.</p>
			<p>They agreed together at that meeting that Rachel Ray was the head and front of the whole offence, the source of all the evil done and to be done, and the one great sinner in the matter. It was clear to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan that Rachel could have no just pretensions to look for such a lover or such a husband as her son; and it was equally clear to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt that she could have had no right to seek a lover or a husband out of the brewery. If Rachel Ray had not been there all might have gone smoothly for both of them. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt did not, perhaps, argue very logically as to the brewery business, or attempt to show either to herself or to her ally that Luke Rowan would have made himself an agreeable partner if he had kept himself free from all love vagaries; but she was filled with an indefinite woman’s idea that the mischief, which she felt, had been done by Rachel Ray, and that against Rachel and Rachel’s pretensions her hand should be turned.</p>
			<p>They resolved therefore that they would go out together and call at the cottage. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt knew, from long neighbourhood, of what stuff <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray was made. “A very good sort of woman,” she said to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan, “and not at all headstrong and perverse like her daughter. If we find the young lady there we must ask her mamma to see us alone.” To this proposition <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan assented, not eagerly, but with a slow, measured, dignified assent, feeling that she was derogating somewhat from her own position in allowing herself to be led by such a one as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt. It was needful that on this occasion she should act with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt and connect herself with the Tappitt interests; but all this she did with an air that distinctly claimed for herself a personal superiority. If <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt did not perceive and understand this, it was her fault, and not <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan’s.</p>
			<p>At two o’clock they stepped into a fly at the brewery door and had themselves driven out to Bragg’s End.</p>
			<p>“Mamma, there’s a carriage,” said Rachel.</p>
			<p>“It can’t be coming here,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray.</p>
			<p>“But it is; it’s the fly from the Dragon. I know it by the man’s white hat. And, oh dear, there’s <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt! Mamma, I shall go away.” And Rachel, without another word, escaped out into the garden. She escaped, utterly heedless of her mother’s little weak prayer that she would remain. She went away quickly, so that not a skirt of her dress might be visible. She felt instantly, by instinct, that these two women had come out there especially as her enemies, as upsetters of her happiness, as opponents of her one great hope in life; and she knew that she could not fight her battle with them face to face. She could not herself maintain her love stoutly and declare her intention of keeping her lover to his word; and yet she did intend to maintain her love, not doubting that he would be true to his word without any effort on her part. Her mother would make a very poor fight⁠—of that she was quite well aware. It would have been well if her mother could have run away also. But, as that could not be, her mother must be left to succumb, and the fight must be carried on afterwards as best it might. The two ladies remained at the cottage for about an hour, and during that time Rachel was sequestered in the garden, hardening her heart against all enemies to her love. If Luke would only stand by her, she would certainly stand by him.</p>
			<p>There was a good deal of ceremony between the three ladies when they first found themselves together in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray’s parlour. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt were large and stiff in their draperies, and did not fit themselves easily in among <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray’s small belongings; and they were stately in their demeanour, conscious that they were visiting an inferior, and conscious also that they were there on no friendly mission. But the interview was commenced with a show of much civility. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt introduced <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan in due form, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan made her little bow, if with some self-asserting supremacy, still with fitting courtesy. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray hoped that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt and the young ladies were quite well, and then there was a short silence, very oppressive to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray, but refreshing rather than otherwise to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan. It gave a proper business aspect to the visit, and paved the way for serious words.</p>
			<p>“Miss Rachel is out, I suppose,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt.</p>
			<p>“Yes, she is out,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray. “But she’s about the place somewhere, if you want to see her.” This she added in her weakness, not knowing how she was to sustain the weight of such an interview alone.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps it is as well that she should be away just at present,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan, firmly but mildly.</p>
			<p>“Quite as well,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt, as firmly, but less mildly.</p>
			<p>“Because we wish to say a few words to you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan.</p>
			<p>“That is what has brought us out so early,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt. It was only half-past two now, and company visiting was never done at Baslehurst till after three. “We want to say a few words to you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray, about a very serious matter. I’m sure you know how glad I’ve always been to see Rachel with my girls, and I had her at our party the other night, you know. It isn’t likely therefore that I should be disposed to say anything unkind about her.”</p>
			<p>“At any rate not to me, I hope,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray.</p>
			<p>“Not to anybody. Indeed I’m not given to say unkind things about people. No one in Baslehurst would give me that character. But the fact is, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt, you’ll allow me,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan. “He’s my son.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes, certainly;⁠—that is, if you wish it,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt, drawing herself up in her chair; “but I thought that perhaps, as I knew Miss Ray so well⁠—”</p>
			<p>“If you don’t mind, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt⁠—” and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan, as she again took the words out of her friend’s mouth, smiled upon her with a smile of great efficacy.</p>
			<p>“Oh, dear, certainly not,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt, acknowledging by her concession the superiority of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan’s nature.</p>
			<p>“I believe you are aware, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan, “that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Luke Rowan is my son.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I’m aware of that.”</p>
			<p>“And I’m afraid you must be aware also that there have been some⁠—some⁠—some talkings as it were, between him and your daughter.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes. The truth is, ma’am, that he has offered himself to my girl, and that she has accepted him. Whether it’s for good or for bad, the open truth is the best, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt.”</p>
			<p>“Truth is truth,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt; “and deception is not truth.”</p>
			<p>“I didn’t think it had gone anything so far as that,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan⁠—who at the moment, perhaps, forgot that deception is not truth; “and in saying that he has actually offered himself, you may perhaps⁠—without meaning it, of course⁠—be attributing a more positive significance to his word than he has intended.”</p>
			<p>“God forbid!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray very solemnly. “That would be a very sad thing for my poor girl. But I think, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan, you had better ask him. If he says he didn’t intend it, of course there will be an end of it, as far as Rachel is concerned.”</p>
			<p>“I can’t ask him just at present,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan, “because he has gone up to London. He went away yesterday afternoon, and there’s no saying when he may be in Baslehurst again.”</p>
			<p>“If ever⁠—,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt, very solemnly. “Perhaps he has not told you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray, that that partnership between him and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">T.</abbr> is all over.”</p>
			<p>“He did tell us that there had been words between him and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tappitt.”</p>
			<p>“Words indeed!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt.</p>
			<p>“And therefore it isn’t so easy to ask him,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan, ignoring <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt and the partnership. “But of course, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray, our object in this matter must be the same. We both wish to see our children happy and respectable.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan, as she said this, put great emphasis on the last word.</p>
			<p>“As to my girl, I’ve no fear whatever but what she’ll be respectable,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray, with more heat than <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt had thought her to possess.</p>
			<p>“No doubt; no doubt. But what I’m coming to is this, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray; here has this boy of mine been behaving foolishly to your daughter, as young men will do. It may be that he has really said something to her of the kind you suppose⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Said something to her! Why, ma’am, he came out here and asked my permission to pay his addresses to her, which I didn’t answer because just at that moment Rachel came in from Farmer Sturt’s opposite⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Farmer Sturt’s!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan, in an under voice and nodding her head. Whereupon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan nodded her head also. One of the great accusations made against <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray had been that she lived on the Farmer Sturt level, and not on the Tappitt level;⁠—much less on the Rowan level.</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—from Farmer Sturt’s,” continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray, not at all understanding this byplay. “So I didn’t give him any answer at all.”</p>
			<p>“You wouldn’t encourage him,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know about that; but at any rate he encouraged himself, for he came again the next morning when I was in Baslehurst.”</p>
			<p>“I hope Miss Rachel didn’t know he was coming in your absence,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan.</p>
			<p>“It would look so sly;⁠—wouldn’t it?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt.</p>
			<p>“No, she didn’t, and she isn’t sly at all. If she had known anything she would have told me. I know what my girl is, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan, and I can depend on her.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray’s courage was up, and she was inclined to fight bravely, but she was sadly impeded by tears, which she now found it impossible to control.</p>
			<p>“I’m sure it isn’t my wish to distress you,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan.</p>
			<p>“It does distress me very much, then, for anybody to say that Rachel is sly.”</p>
			<p>“I said I hoped she wasn’t sly,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt.</p>
			<p>“I heard what you said,” continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray; “and I don’t see why you should be speaking against Rachel in that way. The young man isn’t your son.”</p>
			<p>“No,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt, “indeed he’s not;⁠—nor yet he ain’t <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tappitt’s partner.”</p>
			<p>“Nor wishes to be,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan, with a toss of her head. It was a thousand pities that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray had not her wits enough about her to have fanned into a fire of battle the embers which glowed hot between her two enemies. Had she done so they might probably have been made to consume each other⁠—to her great comfort. “Nor wishes to be!” Then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan paused a moment, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt assumed a smile which was intended to indicate incredulity. “But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray,” continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan, “that is neither here nor there. Luke Rowan is my son, and I certainly have a right to speak. Such a marriage as this would be very imprudent on his part, and very disagreeable to me. From the way in which things have turned out it’s not likely that he’ll settle himself at Baslehurst.”</p>
			<p>“The most unlikely thing in the world,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt. “I don’t suppose he’ll ever show himself in Baslehurst again.”</p>
			<p>“As for showing himself, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt, my son will never be ashamed of showing himself anywhere.”</p>
			<p>“But he won’t have any call to come to Baslehurst, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan. That’s what I mean.”</p>
			<p>“If he’s a gentleman of his word, as I take him to be,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray, “he’ll have a great call to show himself. He never can have intended to come out here, and speak to her in that way, and ask her to marry him, and then never to come back and see her any more! I wouldn’t believe it of him, not though his own mother said it!”</p>
			<p>“I don’t say anything,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan, who felt that her position was one of some difficulty. “But we all do know that in affairs of that kind young men do allow themselves to go great lengths. And the greater lengths they go, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray, the more particular the young ladies ought to be.”</p>
			<p>“But what’s a young lady to do? How’s she to know whether a young man is in earnest, or whether he’s only going lengths, as you call it?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray’s eyes were still moist with tears; and, I grieve to say that though, as far as immediate words are concerned, she was fighting Rachel’s battle not badly, still the blows of the enemy were taking effect upon her. She was beginning to wish that Luke Rowan had never been seen, or his name heard, at Bragg’s End.</p>
			<p>“I think it’s quite understood in the world,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan, “that a young lady is not to take a gentleman at his first word.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, quite,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt.</p>
			<p>“We’ve all of us daughters,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan.</p>
			<p>“Yes, all of us,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt. “That’s what makes it so fitting that we should discuss this matter together in a friendly feeling.”</p>
			<p>“My son is a very good young man⁠—a very good young man indeed.”</p>
			<p>“But a little hasty, perhaps,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt.</p>
			<p>“If you’ll allow me, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, certainly, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan.”</p>
			<p>“A very good young man indeed; and I don’t think it at all probable that in such a matter as this he will act in opposition to his mother’s wishes. He has his way to make in the world.”</p>
			<p>“Which will never be in the brewery line,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt.</p>
			<p>“He has his way to make in the world,” continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan, with much severity; “and if he marries in four or five years’ time, that will be quite as soon as he ought to think of doing. I’m sure you will agree with me, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray, that long engagements are very bad, particularly for the lady.”</p>
			<p>“He wanted to be married next month,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray.</p>
			<p>“Ah, yes; that shows that the whole thing couldn’t come to much. If there was an engagement at all, it must be a very long one. Years must roll by.” From the artistic manner in which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan allowed her voice to dwell upon the words which signified duration of space, any hope of a marriage between Luke and Rachel seemed to be put off at any rate to some future century. “Years must roll by, and we all know what that means. The lady dies of a broken heart, while the gentleman lives in a bachelor’s rooms, and dines always at his club. Nobody can wish such a state of things as that, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray.”</p>
			<p>“I knew a girl who was engaged for seven years,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt, “and she wore herself to a thread-paper⁠—so she did. And then he married his housekeeper after all.”</p>
			<p>“I’d sooner see my girl make up her mind to be an old maid than let her have a long engagement,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan.</p>
			<p>“And so would I, my girls, all three. If anybody comes, I say to them, ‘Let your papa see them. He’ll know what’s the meaning of it.’ It don’t do for young girls to manage those things all themselves. Not but what I think my girls have almost as much wit about them as I have. I won’t mention any names, but there’s a young man about here as well-to-do as any young man in the South Hams, but Cherry won’t as much as look at him.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan again tossed her head. She felt her misfortune in being burdened with such a colleague as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt.</p>
			<p>“What is it you want me to do, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray.</p>
			<p>“I want you and your daughter, who I am sure is a very nice young lady, and good-looking too⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, quite so,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt.</p>
			<p>“I want you both to understand that this little thing should be allowed to drop. If my boy has done anything foolish I’m here to apologize for him. He isn’t the first that has been foolish, and I’m afraid he won’t be the last. But it can’t be believed, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray, that marriages should be run up in this thoughtless sort of way. In the first place the young people don’t know anything of each other; absolutely nothing at all. And then⁠—but I’m sure I don’t want to insist on any differences that there may be in their positions in life. Only you must be aware of this, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray, that such a marriage as that would be very injurious to a young man like my son Luke.”</p>
			<p>“My child wouldn’t wish to injure anybody.”</p>
			<p>“And therefore, of course, she won’t think any more about it. All I want from you is that you should promise me that.”</p>
			<p>“If Rachel will only just say that,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt, “my daughters will be as happy to see her out walking with them as ever.”</p>
			<p>“Rachel has had quite enough of such walking, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt; quite enough.”</p>
			<p>“If harm has come of it, it hasn’t been the fault of my girls,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt.</p>
			<p>Then there was a pause among the three ladies, and it appeared that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan was waiting for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray’s answer. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray did not know what answer she should make. She was already disposed to regard the coming of Luke Rowan to Baslehurst as a curse rather than a blessing. She felt all but convinced that Fate would be against her and hers in that matter. She had ever been afraid of young men, believing them to be dangerous, bringers of trouble into families, roaring lions sometimes, and often wolves in sheep’s clothing. Since she had first heard of Luke Rowan in connection with her daughter she had been trembling. If she could have acted in accordance with her own feelings at this moment, she would have begged that Luke Rowan’s name might never again be mentioned in her presence. It would be better for them, she thought, to bear what had already come upon them, than to run further risk. But she could not give any answer to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan without consulting Rachel;⁠—she could not at least give any such answer as that contemplated without doing so. She had sanctioned Rachel’s love, and could not now undertake to oppose it. Rachel had probably been deceived, and must bear her misfortune. But, as the question stood at present between her and her daughter, she could not at once accede to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan’s views in the matter. “I will talk to Rachel,” she said.</p>
			<p>“Give her my kindest respects,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan; “and pray make her understand that I wouldn’t interfere if I didn’t think it was for both their advantages. Goodbye, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray.” And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan got up.</p>
			<p>“Goodbye, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt, putting out her hand. “Give my love to Rachel. I hope that we shall be good friends yet, for all that has come and gone.”</p>
			<p>But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray would not accept <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt’s hand, nor would she vouchsafe any answer to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt’s amenities. “Goodbye, ma’am,” she said to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan. “I suppose you mean to do the best you can by your own child.”</p>
			<p>“And by yours too,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan.</p>
			<p>“If so, I can only say that you must think very badly of your own son. Goodbye, ma’am.” Then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray curtseyed them out⁠—not without a certain amount of dignity, although her eyes were red with tears, and her whole body trembling with dismay.</p>
			<p>Very little was said in the fly between the two ladies on their way back to the brewery, nor did <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan remain very long as a visitor at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt’s house. She had found herself compelled by circumstances to take a part inimical to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray, but she felt in her heart a much stronger animosity to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt. With <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray she could have been very friendly, only for that disastrous love affair; but with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tappitt she could not again put herself into pleasant relations. I must point out how sadly unfortunate it was that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray had not known how to fan that flame of anger to her own and her daughter’s advantage.</p>
			<p>“Well, mamma,” said Rachel, returning to the room as soon as she heard the wheels of the fly in motion upon the road across the green. She found her mother in tears⁠—hardly able to speak because of her sobs. “Never mind it, mamma: of course I know the kind of things they have been saying. It was what I expected. Never mind it.”</p>
			<p>“But, my dear, you will be brokenhearted.”</p>
			<p>“Brokenhearted! Why?”</p>
			<p>“I know you will. Now that you have learned to love him, you’ll never bear to lose him.”</p>
			<p>“And must I lose him?”</p>
			<p>“She says so. She says that he doesn’t mean it, and that it’s all nonsense.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t believe her. Nothing shall make me believe that, mamma.”</p>
			<p>“She says it would be ruinous to all his prospects, especially just now when he has quarrelled about this brewery.”</p>
			<p>“Ruinous to him!”</p>
			<p>“His mother says so.”</p>
			<p>“I will never wish him to do anything that shall be ruinous to himself; never;⁠—not though I were brokenhearted, as you call it.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, that is it, Rachel, my darling; I wish he had not come here.”</p>
			<p>Rachel went away across the room and looked out of the window upon the green. There she stood in silence for a few minutes while her mother was wiping her eyes and suppressing her sobs. Tears also had run down Rachel’s cheeks; but they were silent tears, few in number and very salt. “I cannot bring myself to wish that yet,” said she.</p>
			<p>“But he has gone away, and what can you do if he does not come again?”</p>
			<p>“Do! Oh, I can do nothing. I could do nothing, even though he were here in Baslehurst every day of his life. If I once thought that he didn’t wish me⁠—to⁠—be⁠—his wife, I should not want to do anything. But, mamma, I can’t believe it of him. It was only yesterday that he was here.”</p>
			<p>“They say that young men don’t care what they say in that way nowadays.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t believe it of him, mamma; his manner is so steadfast, and his voice sounds so true.”</p>
			<p>“But then she is so terribly against it.”</p>
			<p>Then again they were silent for a while, after which Rachel ended the conversation. “It is clear, at any rate, that you and I can do nothing, mamma. If she expects me to say that I will give him up, she is mistaken. Give him up! I couldn’t give him up, without being false to him. I don’t think I’ll ever be false to him. If he’s false to me, then⁠—then, I must bear it. Mamma, don’t say anything to Dolly about this just at present.” In answer to which request <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray promised that she would not at present say anything to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Prime about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan’s visit.</p>
			<p>The following day and the Sunday were not passed in much happiness by the two ladies at Bragg’s End. Tidings reached them that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rowan and her daughter were going to London on the Monday, but no letter came to them from Luke. By the Monday morning <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ray had quite made up her mind that Luke Rowan was lost to them forever, and Rachel had already become worn with care. During that Saturday and Sunday nothing was seen of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Prime at Bragg’s End.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
